---
layout: post
title: Meteor Fundamentals
category:
tags: [javascript, meteor]
published: true
---

## Introduction
Want to learn how this new fandangled Meteor thing works? Great, you're in the right spot. I want to show you around a meteor project and give you some best practice tips for when you want to make your own.

## What is Meteor
Meteor lets you create extraordinarily dynamic pages with frighteningly little code.  Keep in mind that Meteor is super-beta. Version `preview 0.3.7` at the time of this writing.  Don't be surprised if it doesn't work perfectly!

It's written in Javascript on [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/), and consequently most of the code that you will be writing will also be Javascript.  Not too much of a surprise there.  If you want to brush up on your Javascript, take a look at [Javascript Garden](http://bonsaiden.github.com/JavaScript-Garden/), it's an excellent resource.

For storing data, Meteor uses something that's pretty close to MongoDB.  Meteor uses minimongo, which is fairly full featured but doesn't exactly have all of the good stuff from regular Mongo.

Meteor currently uses [handlebars](http://handlebarsjs.com/) for the template engine.  Right now, that's the only choice you have, though supposedly in the future the ability to drop in a different template engine will become available.

At the end of the day, you're still making websites so you're still going to need to know some HTML and CSS as well.

## The Basics

A meteor project consists of mostly just javascript files.  If you place a `*.js` file anywhere in your project, meteor will automatically load it up and run it.  Every javascript file you write in a meteor project is deployed to both the server and the client (unless you use a few specific directories that meteor treats differently, which we'll touch later).  This is one of the things that makes Meteor really, really cool: since everything you're writing is javascript, you can write a function once and use it for both the server and the client!

It actually gets cooler than that.  You can also do other "magical" things like put `*.css` files anywhere in your project, and they will automatically be sent to the client and included on the page.

There are times that you want to separate your server code from your client code.  Thankfully, Meteor has a couple flags to help you out on this one: `Meteor.is_server` and `Meteor.is_client`.  

In the example below, the javascript console in the browser will log "Hi. I'm CLIENT", and the meteor output on the server will print "Hi. I'm SERVER".

{% highlight javascript %}
// This function is available on both the client and the server.
var greet = function(name) {
    console.log("Hi. I'm " + name);
}

// Everything in here is only run on the server.
if(Meteor.is_server) {
    greet("SERVER");
}

// Everything in here is only run on the server.
if(Meteor.is_client) {
    greet("CLIENT");
}
{% endhighlight %}

It's really simple, and it makes it so that you can maximize code reuse between the server and the client, which ideally reduces development time.

## Project Structure

There are times where you don't want to share everything between the client and the server, though.  If you have some private algorithms executing on your server, you don't want Meteor to be sending that down to the client for the world to see.  Meteor provides two "special" directories that will help segregate code between the client and the server: `[project_root]/client/` and `[project_root]/server/`.  Javascript in the server directory will not be sent to the client and will only be executed on the server.  Code in the client directory will only be run on the client.  This is nice because it relieves us of having to use `Meteor.is_client` and `Meteor.is_server` all over the place.  Instead, just put your client code in the client directory and leave it at that!

The project structure is important when considering which files get loaded before others.  Lets say that you have two files: `math.js` and `calculator.js`.  The code in calculator.js depends on some functions in math.js to have been loaded before it can work correctly.  How do you know what order your javascript files are getting loaded in?  Here are the rules:

1. Files in `[project_root]/lib` are loaded first
2. Files are sorted by directory depth. Deeper files are loaded first.
3. Files are sorted in alphabetical order.
4. `main.*` files are loaded last.

Meteor has some special directories that help you deal with breaking apart client/server code and deal with load order:

* `[project_root]/lib/` - Files in this directory will get loaded before your client/server code starts.
* `[project_root]/client/` - Files here are only sent to the client's browser and aren't available or run from the server.
* `[project_root]/server/` - Files here are only run on the server and aren't available on the client.
* `[project_root]/public/` - Meteor serves static media from this directory.  If you put image.jpg in here, feel free to refer to it directly as image.jpg in your html.
* `[project_root]/.meteor/` - Meteor keeps special, project related info in here, like which modules you've installed. *You really shouldn't need to poke around in here.*

## Publish/Subscribe

The server only publishes data according to a rule so that clients only get what is relevant
The client should interact with the server's rule to make sure that it can only interact with appropriate info.

## Reactivity

Meteor saves you the hassle of manually replacing portions of your page when the data changes.  It does this by having "reactive" data sources and contexts.  A reactive context is just a function that will get re-run if it contains a reactive data source that gets updated.  This is a little hard to wrap your mind around initially, so the following example should clear things up.

Below we have the html page and a `Template` called `cool_dude`, and a function in the client javascript which will give a value of `name` for the template to render.

{% highlight html %}
<html>
  <head>
  </head>
  <body>
    {{> cool_dude }}
  </body>
</html>

<template name="cool_dude">
  <p class="important">{{ name }} sure is one cool dude!</p>
</template>
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight javascript %}
// On the client:
Template.cool_dude.name = function() {
    return "Andrew Scala";
};
{% endhighlight %}

When the page renders, it will say "Andrew Scala sure is one cool dude!" (which is true).

Templates are reactive contexts: if the data that it uses to render itself is a reactive data source, then it will re-render itself whenever that data source changes.  The client-side `Session` is a reactive data source.  It will store information like a key-value pair on the client only, and it will be erased when the page is refreshed.

Lets change the template context to use a reactive data source:

{% highlight javascript %}
// When the app starts, register the associate the string "Andrew Scala" with the key "username"
Meteor.startup(function() {
	Session.set("username", "Andrew Scala");
});

Template.cool_dude.name = function() {
    return Session.get("username");
};
{% endhighlight %}

The template now is pulling the value `name` from the Session value `"username"`.  We now have a reactive data source in a reactive context.  If the value stored in Session for `"username"` ever changes, the template will automatically get re-rendered on the page with the new value.  Lets set a new value for `"username"`:

{% highlight javascript %}
Session.set("username", "Bill Murray");
{% endhighlight %}

Immediately after this call, regardless of where it is in the code, the page will now say "Bill Murray sure is one cool dude!" (which is also true).

## Server Methods

Since the client shouldn't be allowed to do anything other than look at what's in the database, you're surely wondering how to get the client to actually store information.  The solution is to use Meteor's "server methods".  The idea is that you define all the functions on the server that do dangerous stuff like modify data, and then let the client call those functions and get return values.  The client never sees the implementation and doesn't personally modify the data.  The server does all the work.

To add a user to your database, create a method called `create_user` that takes a username and lets the server do the inserting.  It'll give the client an ObjectID back so it can fetch user info and do whatever it wants with it later.

{% highlight javascript %}
if(Meteor.is_server) {
    Meteor.methods({
        create_user: function(username) {
    console.log("CREATING USER");
    var USER_id = Users.insert({name: username});
    return user_id;
        },
    });
}

// Remember,	the client's browser only ever sees the code below:
if(Meteor.is_client) {
    var username = "Andrew Scala";

    Meteor.call("create_user", username, function(error, user_id) {
        Session.set("user_id", user_id);
    });
}
{% endhighlight %}


## Protecting your data

By default, you can open up a javascript console on the client app and **start running database queries**.  That's really bad.  The last thing we want is some user visiting your cool Meteor app and running `Users.remove({})` to wipe out all of your user data.

Meteor is probably going to have a better way to protect yourself from this in the future, but as of right now this is the way to do it.  This code is included as a part of the [source](https://github.com/meteor/madewith) on Meteor's [madewith](madewith.meteor.com) site (which is great).  This snippet will disable insert/update/remove actions on your database *from the client*.  Place this in your server code somewhere.

{% highlight javascript %}
Meteor.startup(function() {
  _.each(['collection_name_1', 'collection_name_2'], function(collection) {
    _.each(['insert', 'update', 'remove'], function(method) {
      Meteor.default_server.method_handlers['/' + collection + '/' + method] = function() {};
    });
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}

